The Project Gutenberg eBook of Etiquette for Little Folks, by
Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Etiquette for Little Folks
       Susie Sunbeam's Series

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: March 3, 2022 [eBook #67553]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor and the Online Distributed Proofreading
             Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
             images generously made available by The Internet
             Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ETIQUETTE FOR LITTLE
FOLKS ***



  [Illustration: Woman with two children]




  ETIQUETTE

  FOR

  LITTLE FOLKS.

  SUSIE SUNBEAM’S SERIES.

  BOSTON:
  G. W. COTTRELL, PUBLISHER.
  36 Cornhill.




  Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1856,
  BY J. Q. PREBLE,
  In the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the United States
  for the Southern District of New-York.


  _Stereotyped by_
  NESMITH & TEALL,
  29 Beekman Street.




ETIQUETTE

FOR

LITTLE FOLKS.

RULES FOR GOOD BEHAVIOR AT HOME.


Never enter the house with your hat on, and always bow to any strangers
you may meet at home.

If you pass by your parents at any place, where you see them, either by
themselves or with company, always bow to them.

If you wish to speak to your parents, and see them engaged in discourse
with company, draw back, and leave your business till afterwards; but
if it is really necessary to speak to them, be sure to whisper.

Never speak to your parents without some title of respect, as Sir,
Madam, &c.

Dispute not, nor delay to obey your parents’ commands.

Go not out of doors without your parents’ leave, and be sure to return
by the limited time.

Never grumble, or show discontent at any thing your parents appoint,
speak or do.

If any command or errand is given you to perform, do it with alacrity.

Bear with meekness and patience, and without murmuring or sullenness,
your parents’ reproofs or corrections, even if it should sometimes
happen that they are undeserved.

Never make faces or contortions, nor grimaces, while any one is giving
you commands.

Never take another’s chair, if it be vacated for a short time; it is
impolite.

Never quarrel with your brothers and sisters, but live in peace and
amity.

Use respectful and courteous language towards all the domestics. Never
be domineering nor insulting, for it is the mark of an ignorant and
purse-proud child.


AT TABLE.

Come not to table without having your hands and face washed, and your
hair combed.

Sit not down until your elders are seated. It is unbecoming to take
your place first.

Offer not to carve for yourself, or to take anything, even though it be
something you much desire.

Ask not for anything, but tarry till it be offered to you.

Find no fault with anything that is given you.

When you are helped, be not the first to eat.

Speak not at table. If others are discoursing, meddle not with the
matter; but be silent, except when spoken to.

If you wish anything from the servants, call them softly.

Eat not too fast, nor with greedy behavior.

Eat not too much, but moderately.

Eat not so slowly as to make others wait for you.

Make not a noise with your tongue, mouth, lips, or breath, in eating or
drinking.

Be sure never to speak with food in your mouth.

Endeavor so to eat, that none may see your food while chewing.

Stare not in the face of any one, especially your elders, at the table.

Lean not your elbow on the table, nor on the chair back.

Spit not, cough not, nor blow your nose at the table, if it can be
avoided; but if it be necessary, do it aside, and without noise.

Stuff not your mouth so much as to fill your cheeks. Be content with
small mouthfuls.

Blow not your food when too hot, but wait with patience till it becomes
cool.

Smell not of your food; turn not the other side of it upward to view it
on your plate.

Spit not forth anything that is not convenient to be swallowed, such
as the stones of plums, cherries, or the like; but with your left hand,
neatly move them to the side of your plate.

Fix not your eye upon the plate of another, nor upon the food on the
table.

Lift not up your eyes, nor roll them about while you are drinking.

Bend your body a little downward to your plate, when you move anything
that is carried to your mouth.

Look not earnestly on any one that is eating.

Gnaw not bones at the table, but clear them with your knife, (unless
very small) and hold them not with the whole hand, but with two fingers.

Drink not with anything in your mouth.

Before and after you drink, wipe your mouth with your napkin.

Never pick your teeth at table.

Never drink till you have quite emptied your mouth, and do not drink
often.

Enter not in company without a bow.

Be careful not to turn your back to any, but place yourself so that
none will be behind you.

Lean not on the chair of a superior, standing behind him.

Touch not, nor look upon the books or writing of another, unless the
owner invite or desire it.

Come not near when another reads a letter, or other paper.

Let your countenance be moderately cheerful, neither laughing nor
frowning.

To look upon one in company, and immediately after whisper to another,
is unmannerly.

Whisper not in company. Be not froward and fretful among your equals,
but gentle and affable.

If you cannot avoid gaping, shut your mouth, with your hand or
handkerchief before it, turning the face aside.


AMONG OTHER CHILDREN.

As near as may be, converse not with any but those that are good,
sober, and virtuous: “Evil communications corrupt good manners.”

Reprove your companions as often as there shall be occasion, for wicked
actions or indecent expressions.

Be willing to take those words or actions as jesting, which you have
reason to believe were designed as such.

If your companion be a little too sarcastic in speaking, strive not to
take notice of it, or be moved at all by it.

Abuse him not, either by word or deed.

Deal justly among those who are your equals, as solicitously as if you
were a man with men, and about business of higher importance.

Be not selfish altogether, but kind, free, and generous to others.

Avoid sinful and unlawful recreations, and all such as prejudice the
welfare of body or mind.

Scorn not, nor laugh at any because of their infirmities; nor affix
to any one a vexing title of contempt and reproach; but pity such as
are so visited, and be glad that you are otherwise distinguished and
favored.




IN SCHOOL.


Bow at entering, especially if the teacher be present.

Walk quietly to your own seat, and move not from one place to another
till school time be over.

If your teacher be conversing with a stranger, stare not at them, nor
listen to their talk.

Interrupt not your teacher while a stranger or visitor is with him, but
defer any question or request till he be at leisure.

If your teacher speak to you, rise up and bow, making your answer
standing.

If a stranger speak to you in school, stand up and answer, with the
same respect and ceremony, both of word and gesture, as if you were
speaking to your teacher.

Make not haste out of school, but soberly retire when your turn comes,
without hurry or noise.

Go not rudely home through the streets. Stand not talking with boys who
delay you; but go quietly home, and with all convenient speed.




AT CHURCH.


Walk quietly and soberly to the pew; run not, nor go playing.

Sit where you are directed by your parents.

Change not seats, but continue in the place where you are desired.

Talk not in church. Fix your eye upon the minister; let it not wildly
wander to gaze on any person or thing.

Attend diligently to the words of the minister. Pray with him when
he prays, at least in your heart; and while he is preaching, listen
attentively, that you may remember. Be not hasty to run out of the
church after the worship is ended, as if you were weary of being there.

Walk decently and soberly home, without haste or playfulness, thinking
upon what you have been hearing.

Always remember to be punctual at church. Never, if it can possibly be
avoided, disturb the services by coming in after they have commenced.




IN THE STREET.


Walk quietly and unobtrusively in the street, neither singing,
whistling, or shouting.

Affront none, especially your elders, by word or deed.

Jeer not at any person, whatever.

Always give the right hand to your superiors, (by superiors, I do not
mean so much in regard to birth, as age, merit, and the light in
which they are regarded by the world,) when you either meet or walk
with them; and mind also to give them the wall, in meeting or walking
with them; for that is the upper hand, though in walking your superior
should then be at your left hand.

But when three persons walk together, the middle place is the most
honorable; and a son may walk at his father’s right hand, while his
younger brother walks at his left.

Give your superiors place to pass before you, in any narrow place where
two persons cannot pass at once.

If you go with your parents, teacher, or any superior, go not playfully
through the streets.

Pay your respects to all you meet, of your acquaintance or friends.

It is impolite to stare at every unusual person or thing which you may
see in the street, or to use any improper postures, either of head,
hands, feet, or body.




TO YOUR PARENTS.


Children, these are the most essential of those rules of behavior,
the observance of which will deliver you from the disgraceful titles
of sordid and clownish, and entail upon you the honor of being called
well-bred children; for there is scarcely a sadder sight, than a
clownish and unmannerly child. Avoid, therefore, with the greatest
diligence, so vile an ignominy.

Be humble, submissive, and obedient to those who have a just claim to
your subjection, by nature and providence: such are parents, masters,
or tutors, whose commands and laws have no other tendency than your
truest good. Be always obsequious and respectful, never bold, insolent,
or saucy, either in words or gestures.

Let your body be on every occasion, pliable, and ready to manifest,
in due and becoming ceremonies, the inward reverence you bear towards
those above you.

By these means, by timely and early accustoming yourselves to a sweet
and spontaneous obedience in your youthful stations and relations,
your minds being habituated to that which is so indispensably your
duty, the task of obedience in farther relations will be performed with
greater ease and pleasure; and when you arrive at manhood, there will
remain in your well-managed minds no presumptuous folly, that may tempt
you to be other than faithful and good citizens.




TO SUPERIORS.


Among superiors, speak not till you are spoken to, or are asked to
speak.

Hold not your hand, nor anything else before your mouth when you speak.
Come not very near the one you speak to.

If your superior speak to you while you sit, stand up before you give
an answer.

Speak not very loud, nor too low. Answer not one who is speaking to
you, till he is done.

Strive not with your superiors, in argument or discourse; but easily
submit your opinion to their assertions.

If your superior speak anything wherein you know he is mistaken,
correct not, nor contradict him, nor laugh at the hearing of it; but
pass over the error, without notice or interruption.

Speak not, without Sir, or some other title of respect, which is due to
him to whom you speak.

Mention not frivolous or little things among grave persons or superiors.

If your superior hesitate in his words, pretend not to help him out.

Come not very near to two that are whispering, neither ask what they
converse upon.

When your parent or master speaks to any person, speak not, nor hearken
to them.

If immodest words be used in your hearing, smile not, but settle your
countenance, as if you did not hear it.

Boast not in discourse of your own wit or doings.

If your superior be relating a story, say not, “I have heard it
before,” but attend to it as if it were altogether new to you. Seem not
to question the truth of it. If he tell it not right, suggest not, nor
endeavor to help him out, or add to his relation.

Beware how you utter anything hard to be believed.

Interrupt no one in speaking, though he be your intimate.

Coming into company when any topic is being discussed, ask not what was
the preceding conversation, but listen to the remainder.

Laugh not in, or at, your own story, wit or jest.

Speaking of any distant person, it is rude and unmannerly to point at
him.

Be not over earnest in talking, to justify your own words.

Let your words be modest, about those things which concern only
yourself.

Repeat not the words of a superior, who asks you a question, or talks
with you.

[Illustration: decorative line]




TO EQUALS.


Be kind, pleasant, and loving, not cross, nor churlish, to your equals;
and in thus behaving yourselves, all persons will naturally desire
your familiar acquaintance; every one will be ready and willing, upon
opportunity, to assist you.

Your friends will be then all those who know you, and observe the
excellence and sweetness of your deportment. This practice, also, by
inducing a habit of obliging, will fit you for converse and society,
and facilitate and assist your dealing with men in riper years.

[Illustration: decorative line]




TO INFERIORS.


Be meek, courteous, and affable to your inferiors; not proud nor
scornful. To be courteous, even to the lowest, is a true index of a
great and generous mind. But the insulting and scornful one, who
has been himself originally low, ignoble, or beggarly, makes himself
ridiculous to his equals, and by his inferiors is repaid with scorn and
hatred.

[Illustration: decorative line]




RECOGNITIONS.


A gentleman, on meeting a lady of his acquaintance in the street,
or elsewhere, should not presume to bow to her, till she has first
recognised him; or she may feel compelled to notice him, when she would
not choose to do so otherwise.

A gentleman should never recognise a lady, to whom he has never been
presented, at a ball or evening party, and should pass her as a
stranger, unless she chooses to recognise him, when he should, as in
all other cases, return the salute.

A very young person should wait to be recognised by one more advanced
in age.




INTRODUCTIONS.


On giving introductions, always present a gentleman to a lady, save
when a lady enters a room where several persons are assembled, when
the lady is presented. Very young persons should be presented to older
ones; and we should always present individuals to those persons to whom
we owe particular respect, on account of age, station, &c.

It is in good taste to present both parties, merely inverting the order
of the names.




COMPLIMENTARY CARDS AND NOTES.


Miss Foster presents her compliments to Miss Edwards, and requests the
honor of her company at a Tea-party, on Wednesday afternoon.

  16 Arch street.
  Tuesday noon.

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Edwards presents her respects to Miss Foster, and accepts her
kind invitation with pleasure.

  30 Chestnut street.
  Tuesday noon.

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss E. presents her respects to Miss F., and regrets that a
pre-engagement prevents her acceptance of her polite invitation.

       *       *       *       *       *

William Harris presents his respectful compliments to Miss Brown, and
trusts she has experienced no ill consequences from her last evening’s
fatigue at the assembly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Brown finds herself greatly obliged by Mr. Harris’ kind inquiries,
and is happy to inform him she is perfectly well.

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Brown is greatly obliged by Mr. Harris’ kind inquiry, and is sorry
to say that she suffers under a severe cold, in consequence of last
evening’s amusement.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. W. presents his compliments to Mr. S., and hopes, if Mr. S. is
disengaged, that he will dine with him on Monday next, at half-past
three o’clock.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. S. presents his respects to Mr. W., and will avail himself of his
kind invitation with pleasure.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. S. regrets that indisposition will prevent him the honor of dining
with Mr. W. on Monday next.

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Dudley’s compliments to Mrs. Windsor, and will be obliged by her
company to dinner on Thursday next, at three o’clock.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Johnson returns her best respects to Mr. Wilson, and is greatly
indebted to him for his obliging present.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. and Mrs. Bristow present their compliments to Mrs. Truman, and hope
for the pleasure of her company on Thursday evening next, to tea.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. and Mrs. Truman are greatly obliged by Mr. and Mrs. Bristow’s kind
invitation, and will do themselves the honor of waiting upon them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. and Mrs. Truman are exceedingly sorry that a pre-engagement will
prevent them from accepting Mr. and Mrs. Bristow’s kind invitation.




DINNER PARTIES.


Whenever dinners are given to invited guests, civility requires that
an early answer should be returned; for the proper wording of such
answers, I refer you to the Notes of Invitation, where full directions
are given. An acceptance, in such a case, should be as binding as a
promissory note; and no light cause should ever be allowed to prevent
your fulfilling your engagement. Want of punctuality at a dinner party,
is an affront to the whole company, as well as to the gentleman and
lady of the house.

A ceremonious dinner requires that the company be well and handsomely
dressed, though not in such gay attire as is usually worn at a ball or
evening party.

Arrived at the place, and disrobed of your cloak, let your gloves be
on, and with erect form and firm step, enter the parlor. Look towards
the lady of the house, and walk up at once to her, not turning to the
right or the left, or noticing any one, until you have made your bow to
her, and to the host. Then you may turn off towards the young people,
and take a seat among them, with that agreeable expression of sympathy
on your face, which encourages conversation.

On entering the dining-room, you must use your eyes to discover which
part of the table is considered the most honorable. Try to seat
yourself among the least important portion of the company, unless
desired by the lady or gentleman of the house to take a particular seat.

When fairly seated in the right place, spread your napkin in your lap
to protect your dress from accident; take off your gloves, and put them
in your lap, under your napkin.

When you send your plate for anything, whether by the hand of a
servant or friend, take off the knife and fork, and lay them down on
the cloth, supporting the ends on your bread, or hold them in your hand
in a horizontal position.

After dinner, you are expected to take leave more generally and
sociably, than after any other kind of party, except it be a small
supper party.




GOING INTO COMPANY.


A young person ought to be able to go into a room, and address the
company, without the least embarrassment.

Ignorance and vice are the only things of which we need be ashamed.
Avoid these, and you may go into what company you will.

A modest assurance in every part of life, is the most advantageous
qualification we can possibly acquire.

[Illustration: decorative line]




GOOD BREEDING.


To show the politeness of a true gentleman, you must be quick to
observe four things:

1. What your place is.

2. What is due to every person.

3. How to do what is proper in an agreeable manner.

4. How to make yourself acceptable to others, in person, manners, and
conversation.

You can be as polite to the boot-black as to the President. This is
done, not by an air of condescension, but by treating him as a man,
according to his place. Render him his due, and he will be likely to
render you yours.

The same person who is overbearing to his inferiors, is likely to show
a cringing servility to his superiors. Both faults are marks of a mean
and groveling mind. Maintain your self-respect, if you would enjoy the
respect of others.

Cherish that delicacy of sentiment, that quick sympathy with others,
that nice sense of justice which will make you as regardful of their
feelings as of their more substantial rights, and you will not fail to
be polite. Without the sentiments of a gentleman, you may know all the
rules of politeness, and be scrupulously observant of all the external
forms of good breeding, and yet never be a gentleman.

In short, to be a true gentleman, you must be generous and noble,
as well as just and courteous. You must be scrupulously careful to
be--Pure in body, pure in manners, pure in morals, and pure in heart.

Follow fashion moderately, if you would follow it gracefully. Never
rely on dress to make you a gentleman. It is as flimsy a disguise as
the lion’s skin was to the ass; his braying betraying him, and his
unsuitable attire only made him appear the more ridiculous.

A good enunciation is a distinctive mark of good breeding. Speak
your words plainly and distinctly, and in a moderate tone of voice.
Pronounce words in the manner that is used by the best bred persons,
but not affectedly, or with a strained precision. Avoid all vulgar or
inaccurate vowel sounds, as keow, ile, soit, for cow, oil, sight. Do
not slip or smother your consonants, as gen’lm’n for gentleman, mornin’
for morning, &c.




CLEANLINESS.


No one can please in company, however graceful his air, unless he be
clean and neat in his person.

He who is not thoroughly clean in his person, will be offensive to all
with whom he converses. A particular regard to the cleanliness of your
mouth, teeth, hands, and nails, is but common decency.

A foul mouth and unclean hands, are certain marks of vulgarity; the
first is the cause of an offensive breath, which nobody can endure, and
the last is declarative of dirty work, and disgraceful negligence to
remove the filth. One may always know a gentleman by the state of his
hands and nails. The flesh at the roots should be kept back, so as to
show the semicircles at the bottom of the nails; the edges of the nails
should never be cut down below the ends of the fingers, nor should they
be suffered to grow longer than the fingers.

For black and dirty teeth, where they are sound, there can be no
excuse. They are the mark of a lazy, vulgar fellow. Let me entreat you
to form the habit of brushing your teeth, every night before you sleep.

Now, clean garments and a clean person, are as necessary to health, as
to prevent giving offence to other people. It is a maxim with me, which
I have lived to see verified, that he who is negligent at twenty years
of age, will be a sloven at forty, and intolerable at fifty.

[Illustration: decorative line]




GRACEFULNESS.


Be graceful in your manners. The different effects of the same thing,
said or done, when accompanied or deserted by graceful manners, is
almost inconceivable. They prepare the way to the heart. From your
own observations, reflect what a disagreeable impression, an awkward
address, a slovenly figure, an ungraceful manner of speaking, whether
fluttering, or drawling, &c., make upon you, at first sight, in a
stranger, and how they prejudice you against them.




MODESTY.


Modesty is a polite accomplishment, and generally attendant upon merit.
It is engaging, in the highest degree, and wins the hearts of all with
whom we are acquainted. None are more disgusting in company, than the
impudent and presuming.

Nothing can atone for the want of modesty; without it, beauty is
ungraceful, and wit detestable.

Be particularly careful not to speak of yourself, if you can help it.
An impudent person intrudes himself abruptly upon all occasions, and is
ever the hero of his own story.

The less you say of yourself, the more the world will give you credit
for; and the more you say of yourself, the less they will believe you.

Whatever perfections you may have, be assured people will find them
out; but whether they do or not, nobody will take them upon your own
word.




CIVILITY.


The art of pleasing is a very necessary one to possess, but a very
difficult one to acquire. It can hardly be reduced to rules, and your
own good sense and observation will teach you more of it than I can. Do
as you would be done by, is the surest method of pleasing.

Observe carefully what is pleasing to you in others; and probably the
same things in you will please others.

If you are pleased with the complaisance and attention of others to
you, depend upon it, the same complaisance and attention, on your part,
will equally please them.

It is not enough not to be rude; you should be civil and distinguished
for your good breeding. The first principle of this good breeding is,
never to say anything that you think can be disagreeable to anybody in
company; but, on the contrary, you should endeavor to say what will
be agreeable to them; and that in an easy and natural manner, without
seeming to study for compliments. There is likewise such a thing as a
civil look and a rude look; you should look civil, as well as be so;
for if, while you are saying a civil thing, you look gruff and surly,
nobody will be obliged to you for a civility that seemed to come so
unwillingly.

If you have occasion to contradict any one, or to set him right from
a mistake, it would be very brutal to say, “That is not so; I know
better;” or, “You are wrong;” but you should say, with a civil look, “I
beg your pardon, I believe you mistake;” or, “If I may take the liberty
of contradicting you, I believe it is so and so:” for, though you may
know a thing better than other people, yet is very disagreeable to
tell them so, directly, without something to soften it; but remember
particularly, that whatever you may say or do, with ever so civil an
intention, a great deal consists in the manner and the look, which must
be genteel, easy, and natural.

Civility is particularly due to all women; and remember that no
provocation whatever can justify any person in being uncivil to a
woman; and the greatest man in the land would be reckoned a brute, if
he was not civil to the meanest woman. It is due to their sex, and is
the only protection they have against the superior strength of ours.




MORAL CHARACTER.


There is nothing so delicate as your moral character, and nothing
that it is your interest so much to preserve pure. Should you be
suspected of injustice, malignity, perfidy, lying, &c., all the parts
and knowledge in the world will never procure you esteem, friendship,
or respect. A strange concurrence of circumstances has sometimes
raised very bad men to high stations; but they have been raised, like
criminals to a pillory, where their persons and their crimes, by
being more conspicuous, are only the more known, the more pelted and
insulted. If in any case whatsoever, dissimulation were pardonable, it
would be in the case of morality; though, even then, a Pharasaical
pomp of virtue would not be advisable. But I will recommend to you a
most scrupulous tenderness for your moral character, and the utmost
care not to do or say anything that may ever so slightly taint it. Show
yourself, upon all occasions, the advocate, the friend, but not the
bully, of virtue.




GOOD BREEDING.


Observe the best and most well-bred of the French people; how agreeably
they insinuate little civilities in their conversation. They think it
so essential that they call an honest and a civil man by the same name,
of “honnete homme;” and the Romans called civility, “humanitas,” as
thinking it inseparable from humanity: and depend upon it, that your
reputation and success will, in a great measure, depend upon the degree
of good breeding of which you are master.

From what has been said, I conclude with the observation, that
gentleness of manners, with firmness of mind, is a short but full
description of human perfection, on this side of religious and moral
duties.




Transcriber’s Notes

A few minor errors in punctuation and spelling were corrected.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ETIQUETTE FOR LITTLE
FOLKS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
